"The Decision to Go to the Moon" by John F. Kennedy
May 25, 1961

President Pitzer, Mr. Vice President, Governor, Congressman Thomas, Senator Wiley, and Congressman Miller, Mr. Webb, Mr. Bell, scientists, distinguished guests, and ladies and gentlemen:

I appreciate your president having made me an honorary visiting professor, and I::shortcutcassure you::shortcutmmy first lecture::shortcutcbe::shortcutlbrief.

I am delighted to be here and I'm particularly delighted to be here on this occasion.

We meet at a college noted::shortcutnknowledge,::shortcutscity noted::shortcutnprogress,::shortcutsstate noted::shortcutnstrength, and we stand in need of::shortcutathree,::shortcutnwe meet in an hour of change and challenge,::shortcutsdecade of hope and fear, in an age of both knowledge and ignorance. The greater::shortcutwknowledge increases, the greater::shortcutwignorance unfolds.

Despite the striking fact::shortcutmmost of the scientists::shortcutmthe world has ever known are alive and working today, despite the fact::shortcutmthis Nation's own scientific manpower is doubling every 12 years::shortcutsrate of growth::shortcututhan three times::shortcutmof::shortcutwpopulation as a whole, despite that, the vast stretches of the unknown::shortcutx unanswered::shortcutx unfinished still far outstrip::shortcutwcollective comprehension.

No man can fully grasp how far and how fast we::shortcutgcome,::shortcuttcondense, if you will, the 50,000 years of man's recorded history::shortcutstime span of::shortcutta half-century. Stated in these terms, we know::shortcutllittle about the first 40 years, except at the end of them advanced man had learned to use the skins of animals to cover them. Then about 10 years ago, under this standard, man emerged::shortcutihis caves to construct other kinds of shelter. Only five years ago man learned to write and use a cart::shortcutqwheels. Christianity began less than two years ago. The printing press came this year,::shortcutxn less than two months ago, during this whole 50-year span of human history, the steam engine provided a new source of power. Newton explored the meaning of gravity. Last month electric lights and telephones and automobiles and airplanes became available. Only last week did we develop penicillin and television and nuclear power, and now if America's new spacecraft succeeds in reaching Venus, we::shortcutchave literally reached the stars before midnight tonight.

This is a breathtaking pace, and such a pace cannot help::shortcuttcreate new ills as it dispels old, new ignorance, new problems, new dangers. Surely the opening vistas of space promise high costs and hardships, as well as high reward.

So it is::shortcutosurprising::shortcutmsome would::shortcutgus stay::shortcutdwe are a little longer to rest, to wait. But this city of Houston, this state of Texas, this country of the United States was::shortcutobuilt by those::shortcutfwaited and rested and wished to look::shortcutvthem. This country was conquered by those::shortcutfmoved forward-and so::shortcutcspace.

William Bradford, speaking in 1630 of the founding of the Plymouth Bay Colony, said that::shortcutagreat and honorable actions are accompanied with::shortcutpdifficulties, and both must be enterprised and overcome::shortcutqanswerable courage.

If this capsule history of::shortcutwprogress teaches us anything, it is::shortcutmman, in his quest::shortcutnknowledge and progress, is determined and cannot be deterred. The exploration of space::shortcutcgo ahead, whether we join in it or not, and it is one of the::shortcutpadventures of::shortcutatime, and no nation::shortcutbexpects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay::shortcutvin this race::shortcutnspace.

Those::shortcutfcame before us made certain::shortcutmthis country rode the first waves of the industrial revolution, the first waves of modern invention,::shortcutx first wave of nuclear power, and this generation does::shortcutointend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. We mean to be a part of it-we mean to lead it. For the eyes of the world now look into space, to the moon and to the planets beyond, and we::shortcutgvowed::shortcutmwe shall::shortcutosee it governed by a hostile flag of conquest,::shortcuttby a banner of freedom and peace. We::shortcutgvowed::shortcutmwe shall::shortcutosee space filled::shortcutqweapons of mass destruction, but::shortcutqinstruments of knowledge and understanding.

Yet the vows of this Nation can only be fulfilled if we in this Nation are first, and, therefore, we intend to be first. In short,::shortcutwleadership in science and industry,::shortcutwhopes::shortcutnpeace and security,::shortcutwobligations to ourselves as well as others,::shortcutarequire us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to solve them::shortcutnthe good of::shortcutamen, and to become the world's leading space-faring nation.

We set sail on this new sea::shortcutkthere is new knowledge to be gained, and new rights to be won, and::shortcuthmust be won and used::shortcutnthe progress of::shortcutapeople. For space science, like nuclear science and::shortcutatechnology, has no conscience of its own. Whether it::shortcutcbecome a force::shortcutngood or ill depends on man, and only if the United States occupies a position of pre-eminence can we help decide whether this new ocean::shortcutcbe a sea of peace or a new terrifying theater of war. I do::shortcutosay::shortcutmwe should or::shortcutcgo unprotected against the hostile misuse of space any::shortcututhan we go unprotected against the hostile use of land or sea,::shortcuttI do say::shortcutmspace can be explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war, without repeating the mistakes::shortcutmman has made in extending his writ around this globe of ours.

There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of::shortcutamankind, and its opportunity::shortcutnpeaceful cooperation many never come again. But why,::shortcutrsay, the moon? Why choose this as::shortcutwgoal? And::shortcuthmay well ask why climb the highest mountain? Why, 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic? Why does Rice play Texas?

We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things,::shortcutobecause::shortcuthare easy,::shortcuttbecause::shortcuthare hard,::shortcutkthat goal::shortcutcserve to organize and measure the best of::shortcutwenergies and skills,::shortcutkthat challenge is one::shortcutmwe are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one::shortcutbwe intend to win,::shortcutx others, too.

It is::shortcutnthese reasons::shortcutmI regard the decision last year to shift::shortcutwefforts in space::shortcutilow to high gear as among the most important decisions that::shortcutcbe made during my incumbency in the office of the Presidency.

In the last 24 hours we::shortcutgseen facilities now being created::shortcutnthe greatest and most complex exploration in man's history. We::shortcutgfelt the ground shake::shortcutx air shattered by the testing of a Saturn C-1 booster rocket, many times as powerful as the Atlas::shortcutblaunched John Glenn, generating power equivalent to 10,000 automobiles::shortcutqtheir accelerators on the floor. We::shortcutgseen the site::shortcutdfive F-1 rocket engines, each one as powerful as::shortcutaeight engines of the Saturn combined,::shortcutcbe clustered together to make the advanced Saturn missile, assembled::shortcutsnew building to be built at Cape Canaveral as tall as a 48 story structure, as wide as a city block, and as long as two lengths of this field.

Within these last 19 months at least 45 satellites::shortcutgcircled the earth. Some 40 of them were made in the United States of America and::shortcuthwere far::shortcutusophisticated and supplied far::shortcutuknowledge to the people of the world than those of the Soviet Union.

The Mariner spacecraft now on its way to Venus is the most intricate instrument in the history of space science. The accuracy of::shortcutmshot is comparable to firing a missile::shortcutiCape Canaveral and dropping it in this stadium between the 40-yard lines.

Transit satellites are helping::shortcutwships at sea to steer a safer course. Tiros satellites::shortcutggiven us unprecedented warnings of hurricanes and storms, and::shortcutcdo the same::shortcutnforest fires and icebergs.

We::shortcutghad::shortcutwfailures,::shortcuttso::shortcutgothers, even if::shortcuthdo::shortcutoadmit them. And::shortcuthmay be less public.

To be sure, we are behind, and::shortcutcbe behind::shortcutnsome time in manned flight. But we do::shortcutointend to stay behind, and in this decade, we shall make up and move ahead.

The growth of::shortcutwscience and education::shortcutcbe enriched by new knowledge of::shortcutwuniverse and environment, by new techniques of learning and mapping and observation, by new tools and computers::shortcutnindustry, medicine, the home as well as the school. Technical institutions, such as Rice,::shortcutcreap the harvest of these gains.

And finally, the space effort itself, while still in its infancy, has already created a::shortcutpnumber of new companies, and tens of thousands of new jobs. Space and related industries are generating new demands in investment and skilled personnel, and this city and this state, and this region,::shortcutcshare greatly in this growth. What was once the furthest outpost on the old frontier of the West::shortcutcbe the furthest outpost on the new frontier of science and space. Houston, your city of Houston,::shortcutqits Manned Spacecraft Center,::shortcutcbecome the heart of a large scientific and engineering community. During the next 5 years the National Aeronautics and Space Administration expects to double the number of scientists and engineers in this area, to increase its outlays::shortcutnsalaries and expenses to 60 million dollars a year; to invest::shortcutr200 million dollars in plant and laboratory facilities; and to direct or contract::shortcutnnew space efforts over 1 billion dollars::shortcutithis center in this city.

To be sure,::shortcutathis costs us::shortcutaa good deal of money. This year's space budget is three times what it was in January 1961, and it is greater than the space budget of the previous eight years combined. That budget now stands at 5,400 million dollars a year-a staggering sum, though somewhat less than we pay::shortcutncigarettes and cigars every year. Space expenditures::shortcutcsoon rise::shortcutrmore,::shortcuti40 cents per person per week to::shortcututhan 50 cents a week::shortcutnevery man, woman and child in the United States,::shortcutnwe::shortcutggiven this program a high national priority-even though I realize::shortcutmthis is in::shortcutrmeasure an act of faith and vision,::shortcutnwe do::shortcutonow know what benefits await us. But if I were to say, my fellow citizens,::shortcutmwe shall send to the moon, 240,000 miles away::shortcutithe control station in Houston, a giant rocket::shortcututhan 300 feet tall, the length of this football field, made of new metal alloys,::shortcutrof::shortcutbhave::shortcutoyet been invented, capable of standing heat and stresses several times::shortcututhan::shortcutgever been experienced, fitted together::shortcutqa precision better than the finest watch, carrying::shortcutathe equipment needed::shortcutnpropulsion, guidance, control, communications, food and survival, on an untried mission, to an unknown celestial body,::shortcutxn return it safely to earth, re-entering the atmosphere at speeds of over 25,000 miles per hour, causing heat about half::shortcutmof the temperature of the sun-almost as hot as it is here today-and do::shortcutathis, and do it right, and do it first before this decade is out-then we must be bold.

I'm the one::shortcutfis doing::shortcutathe work, so we::shortcutzwant you to stay cool::shortcutna minute.

However, I think we're going to do it, and I think::shortcutmwe must pay what needs to be paid. I don't think we ought to waste any money,::shortcuttI think we ought to do the job. And this::shortcutcbe done in the decade of the Sixties. It may be done while::shortcutrof you are still here at school at this college and university. It::shortcutcbe done during the terms of office of::shortcutrof the people::shortcutfsit here on this platform. But it::shortcutcbe done. And it::shortcutcbe done before the end of this decade.

And I am delighted::shortcutmthis university is playing a part in putting a man on the moon as part of a::shortcutpnational effort of the United States of America.

Many years ago the::shortcutpBritish explorer George Mallory,::shortcutfwas to die on Mount Everest, was asked why did he want to climb it. He said, "Because it is there."

Well, space is there, and we're going to climb it,::shortcutx moon::shortcutx planets are there, and new hopes::shortcutnknowledge and peace are there. And, therefore, as we set sail we ask God's blessing on the most hazardous and dangerous and greatest adventure on::shortcutbman has ever embarked.

Thank you.